Then: "Navy mine sweepers sent out to destroy mines and floating
torpedoes which had missed target--tanker Herbert L. Pratt strikes mine
in shallow water on maiden voyage--War Department asks Congress for
$10,000,000 to set up balloon and plane stations along the coast to
combat sub menace--British steamer Harpathian torpedoed off Virginia
capes--American vessel, name withheld, puts back to 'an Atlantic port'
after being chased by U-boat."

The record continues: "San Diego sunk by mine--tug and four barges
sunk--British freighter attacked--sub sends landing crew on board lumber
schooner off Maine coast, set her afire--Steamer Merak sunk off
Hatteras--tanker torpedoed off Barnegat Bay, beaches blanketed with
oil--Norwegian steamer Vinland--British steamer Peniston and Swedish
steamer Sydland off Nantucket--nine U. S. fishing vessels off
Massachusetts coast--British tanker Mirlo--U.S. Schooner Dorothy
Barrett--tanker Frederick R. Kellogg" and so on and on.

Events of the time and since have swept these happenings out of the
minds of most Americans--even if they knew of it at the time. But
somewhere, half forgotten in Naval files, is an official report,
painstakingly compiled after the war, from ship logs, from stories by
merchant captains and crews, even by officers of surrendered German
submarines, to make up as complete a record as possible of one of the
amazing operations of the war--and one whose magnitude, in territory
covered and damage done, few suspected, even within the Navy, at the
time.

Only two subs had so much as a brush with American ships. The transport
von Steuben, former German liner, proceeding to the rescue of men in
life boats from a merchant ship, dropped depth bombs which the U-boat
escaped by diving to 83 meters, lying low till the enemy had gone.

Closer call had the U-140, largest and most modern of the fleet, which
after sinking several ships off Diamond Shoals, including the light ship
itself, almost caught a tartar when the Brazilian passenger liner,
Uberabe, zigzagging furiously to escape, sent out S.O.S. messages which
brought four U.S. destroyers hurrying to the rescue. Nearest was the USS
Stringham, which proceeding under full speed, using the Uberabe as a
screen, charged on the U-boat, dropped 15 depth charges when the U-boat
dived, timed to explode at different levels.

    [Illustration: Training exercises with U. S. submarines have taught
    airship captains much about the habits, movements and
    characteristics of the underseas craft. (U. S. Navy photo).]

    [Illustration: The year before America got into the last war the
    German submarine U-51 sank a half dozen merchant ships off Nantucket
    Island then proceeded into Newport. (U. S. Navy photo)]

    [Illustration: Navy airships in practice patrols identify, as to
    class and nationality, all surface ships in their area, learn to
    recognize the silhouette of a submarine from afar. (U. S. Navy
    photo)]

The U-boat captain, one of the best in the German navy, drove his craft
at a sharp angle to 400 feet. One charge exploding underneath the sub
turned it stern upward till it stood almost perpendicular. He managed to
level out finally at 415 feet, lay there as long as he dared, finally
reached the surface. His ship was so badly crippled it had to abandon
its mission and set out for home--though it sunk a couple more ships in
the mid-Atlantic on the way back.

The only U-boat casualty was the U-156 which after getting 34 victims in
American waters, getting eight in one day, was itself sunk by mines--but
off Faroe Island as it was almost home.

This then is the story of submarine operations in U. S. waters in
1918--a half hearted effort of short duration started late in the
day--but which destroyed 100 ships, totalling 200,000 tons, most of them
close to our shores.

No one could doubt but that in the event of another war submarines would
be used again, and in more vigorous fashion. The American fleet might
easily keep major enemy ships at a safe distance, and bombing attack
from any part of Europe or over the Pacific would have little military
value. But certainly submarines would find their way past the screen of
Navy craft, bob up off American harbors, again to lay mines in the path
of coastwise steamers, deliver hit-and-run attack by torpedo and gunfire
at American craft.

We could be equally sure that these ugly motorized sharks, churning the
muddy sub-surface waters, would not be satisfied to attack merchantmen
only, would be looking for bigger prey.

On the map showing the operations of German submarines in 1918 let us
superimpose, as an example, the patrol area which two blimps, basing at
Boston, Lakehurst, Cape May and Norfolk might effectively cover in a 12
hour period.

A patrol area of 2,000 square miles per ship is conservative. It assumes
the ship flying at no faster than 35 knots, having visibility of five
miles in all directions. As a matter of fact, allowing a little more
than 40 knots speed--and the airship cruises considerably faster than
that--we might say that a modern blimp could patrol an area 10 miles
wide and 500 miles long in the 12 hours, or an area of 5,000 square
miles. But by criss-crossing back and forth in accordance with a
progressive plan, an area of 2,000 square miles could be made reasonably
secure--except under extremely adverse conditions of visibility.

Laying these patrol areas down over the map of submarine operations of
1918 it is apparent that such patrols would cover much of the territory
where ship sinkings were achieved, cover all of the areas where mines
were laid.

With blimps operating from such bases, in addition to the patrols being
executed by other naval craft, we might conclude that no submarine could
venture within 100 miles of the American coast during daylight hours
without considerable risk of detection, and that blimps should be able
to make contribution to the safety of coastwise shipping and harbor
cities.

The patrol areas assigned to the blimps would have their flanks exposed,
but airship patrol would be co-ordinated with that of airplanes and
surface craft, guarding the areas farther out.

That this conclusion is reasonable is indicated by the fact that from
1939 on, Lakehurst Naval Air Station, under command of Commander G. H.
Mills had been doing just this, patroling areas all the way from
Nantucket to Cape Hatteras.




                               CHAPTER II
                   British Airships in the First War


    [Illustration: Airship over water]

Germany entered the first World War with high expectations as to one,
perhaps two of its new weapons of war. Its submarines might offset
Britain's superiority at sea, and certainly the Zeppelins, which had
proved themselves in four years of commercial flying, would be able to
cross the English Channel and carry the war to the island which had seen
no invasion since William the Conqueror.

No nation except Germany had Zeppelins. And as the German people began
to feel the pinch of the blockade, cutting their life line of food and
supplies, they brought increasing public pressure on High Command to use
these weapons to punish England.

Later commentators have speculated as to whether, if Germany had held
its fire, waited till it could assemble an overpowering force of
Zeppelins and submarines and stage a joint attack, it might not have
been able to force a quick decision.

But the Zeppelins were sent over a few at a time, as fast as they could
be built, and England was given time to devise defenses. These were
chiefly higher altitude airplanes, farther ranging anti-aircraft guns,
sky piercing searchlights, which combined to force the invaders to fly
continuously higher as the war wore on, as high as 25,000 feet at times,
with corresponding sacrifice of bombing accuracy. And when machine guns,
synchronized with the propellers, were mounted in airplane cockpits, and
began to spit inflammable bullets into the hydrogen filled bags and send
them down in flames, the duel took on more even terms.

Less spectacularly the Zeppelins were used on a wide scale as
reconnaissance and scouting craft, which flying fast and far were given
credit on more than one occasion for saving German Naval squadrons from
being cut off by superior Allied forces, were acknowledged even by the
British to have played an important part in the Battle of Jutland.

It is a little hard to realize today that whatever air battles were
waged over water in the last war were conducted chiefly by
lighter-than-air craft. Planes staged spectacular battles along the
Allied lines in France, but lack of range and carrying capacity forced
them to leave sea battles to the airship. As a measure of that
situation, the great hangars at Friedrichshafen, spawning ground of the
Zeppelins, one of the outstanding targets in all Europe if England were
to draw the dirigible's fangs, lay hardly more than a hundred miles from
the French borders, but even that distance was too great for effective
attack.

While these greater events were taking place, British airships, smaller
in size, less spectacular, were playing no small part in repelling
Germany's other threat, the submarine.


                   Blimps Used to Search for U-Boats

Navy opinion around the world was skeptical at the beginning of the War
as to whether submarines would ever be practical. There were mechanical
troubles, accidents, usually costly. Even Germany, prior to 1914, used
to send an escort of warships along to convoy its subs to their
station--then send out for them afterward to bring them home again.

But the war was only a few weeks old when the captain of the U-9,
cruising down the Dutch coast, discovered that his gyro compass was off,
and when he got his bearings saw that he was 50 miles off course. He
wasted no breath, however, on many-syllabled German swear words, for off
on his southern horizon were the masts of three British ships. He dived,
came up alongside, and in 30 minutes, single handed, with well directed
torpedoes, had sunk in turn HMS Aboukir, Hogue and Cressy.

The morning of September 22, 1914, marked the beginning of a new era in
Naval warfare. The warring nations grew furiously busy building their
own U-boats and devising defenses against the enemy's. Among these
defenses was the non-rigid airship.

These two vehicles, so widely different, have much in common. If we may
be technical for a minute we may say that the airship and the submarine
are both buoyant bodies, completely immersed and floating in a
medium--air and water respectively--of changing pressures, that each
uses dual sets of steering gear and rudders to control direction and
altitude. And further, that the airship in 1941 faces the same division
of opinion as the submarine faced in 1914, as to whether, particularly
with rigid airships, it will ever be widely used and accepted.

In any event in 1914 there was an urgent and immediate job to be done.

Indicator nets and high explosive mines might give some protection to
harbors, might be stretched across steamship lanes and planted around
the hiding places of the submarines, if those could be discovered. But
troop ships and munition ships and food ships must be dispatched without
interruption across the tricky waters of the English Channel to France,
and for this purpose convoy escorts were devised, with camouflaged
warships zigzagging alongside, while high aloft in lookout stations men
with binoculars strained their eyes, searching the waters, ahead,
astern, alongside, their search lingering long over every bit of
floating wreckage--and there was a lot of it--to make sure it was not a
periscope.

These lookouts aboard ship quickly had a new ally in the air. As the
submarine menace grew, binoculars began to flash too from the fuselages
of bobbing blimps overhead. At a few hundred or perhaps a thousand feet
elevation they could see deep below the surface, and quickly learned to
recognize at considerable distance the tell-tale trail of bubbles or
feathered waters or smear of oil which denoted the enemy's presence,
might even pick out the shadowy form of the submerged craft itself.

The value of the airship in convoy was that it could fly slowly, could
throttle down its motors and march in step with its charges, cruise
ahead, alongside, behind. The very speed of its sister craft, the
airplane, handicapped its use in this field.

This characteristic of the blimp was even more useful in hunting U-boat
nests. The blimp could head into the wind, with its motors barely
turning over, hover for hours at zero speed over suspect areas. It could
fly at low altitudes, follow even slender clues. Seagulls following a
periscope sometimes gave highly useful information. An orange crate
moving against the tide attracted the attention of one alert pilot, for
the crate concealed a periscope, and the blimp dropped